add: new blog post on packaging and peer review (#476)
pyOpenSci/pyopensci.github.io: _posts/2024-08-21-pyopensci-monumental-growth-2024.md

---
layout: single
title: "It's Been a Long Short Road: The Monumental Past 2 Years of pyOpenSci"
excerpt: "Learn about what pyOpenSci has accomplished in the last two years, including the evolution of our packaging guide, the expansion of our peer review process, and the vibrant community we've built."
author: "Leah Wasser"
permalink: /blog/what-pyopensci-accomplished-with-two-years-of-funding.html
header:
  overlay_image: images/headers/scipy-2024-workshop.png
  overlay_filter: rgba(20, 13, 36, 0.8)
categories:
  - blog-post
  - community
classes: wide
toc: true
comments: true
---

## It's been two years since I started working full-time on pyOpenSci

I have been working full-time building pyOpenSci for two years now, thanks to funding from the [Sloan Foundation](https://sloan.org/) and [CZI (Chan Zuckerberg Initiative)](https://chanzuckerberg.com/). pyOpenSci has come SO FAR in two years.

It's time to take a breath and celebrate everything the pyOpenSci community has accomplished. Before we move on to the next big thing—our pyOpenSci Fall Festival (more on that below)—I want to take a moment to reflect on:

* Where we've been,
* What we've accomplished, and

> * The incredible community of practice that we've built.

Author: Thanks! I have no preference at all. I wish I could set up Grammarly to tell me how to format lists, but maybe we can use Vale for that. If we had a style guide in our CI, I'd follow it.

I'll wrap up by discussing what's next for pyOpenSci.

## A brief history of pyOpenSci

I founded pyOpenSci in 2018 because I saw the pain points that scientists were
facing in creating open, reproducible workflows using Python. My experience
inspired me to establish a vibrant, inclusive pyOpenSci community of practice
fueled by making open science best practices more accessible to scientists.

> pyOpenSci makes open science more accessible by [developing education resources](/learn.html), [running training events](/events/index.html), running an [open software peer review process](/about-peer-review/index.html) and [partnering with other communities](/partners.html). From humble beginnings characterized by small community meetings, pyOpenSci has blossomed into a thriving community marked by:

Author: oh yes. that's definitely a typo.

> pyOpenSci makes open science more accessible by [developing education resources](/learn.html), [running training events](/events/index.html), running an [open software peer review process](/about-peer-review/index.html) and [partnering with other communities](/partners.html). From humble beginnings characterized by small community meetings, pyOpenSci has blossomed into a thriving community marked by:

Author: ```suggestion
pyOpenSci makes open science more accessible by [developing educational resources](/learn.html), [running training events](/events/index.html), running an [open software peer review process](/about-peer-review/index.html) and [partnering with other communities](/partners.html). From humble beginnings characterized by small community meetings, pyOpenSci has blossomed into a thriving community marked by:
```

> pyOpenSci makes open science more accessible by [developing education resources](/learn.html), [running training events](/events/index.html), running an [open software peer review process](/about-peer-review/index.html) and [partnering with other communities](/partners.html). From humble beginnings characterized by small community meetings, pyOpenSci has blossomed into a thriving community marked by:

Author: ```suggestion
pyOpenSci makes open science more accessible by [developing educational resources](/learn.html), [running training events](/events/index.html), running an [open software peer review process](/about-peer-review/index.html) and [partnering with other communities](/partners.html). From humble beginnings characterized by small community meetings, pyOpenSci has blossomed into a thriving community marked by:
```

    </a>
    <figcaption> Iterative data-driven program design is a fusion of evaluation and program development that utilizes community feedback to build a program using an iterative and community-responsive approach. You test approaches and collect data about the program's effectiveness. This type of development allows an organization to grow dynamically, following community needs.
    </figcaption>
</figure>

<div class="notice" markdown ="1">

### Responses to the question: *How could pyOpenSci help you with your science, code, and software?*
{: .not_toc}

{% include pyos-blockquote.html quote="[*I want to know...*] What are the best practices for sharing the code?" author="Anonymous" event="AGU 2019 Townhall" class="highlight" event="2019 AGU Town Hall" %}

{% include pyos-blockquote.html quote="[*I want to... *] Streamline the development of good quality, socially responsible, and easily shareable software." author="Anonymous" event="AGU 2019 Townhall" class="highlight magenta" %}

{% include pyos-blockquote.html quote="[*I want more *] Bullet-proof, well-documented packages for Earth science." author="Anonymous" event="AGU 2019 Townhall" class="highlight" %}

> Many earth scientists attend AGU. It's a different crowd than who you meet

Author: I have no opinion on this! If you think it's better to capitalize, we should do that. Earth scientists are referenced as a domain I'm discussing here. For instance, a student studying earth science. It's not a job title specifically. If domain areas are supposed to be capitalized, we should do so. 

It might be useful to write down some of this. 

Then we can see how much of it someone could add to vale? What do you think about that? I won't remember it all. But I would follow a guide or a linter's suggestions.

<div class="notice" markdown ="1">

<h3 class="no-toc"> QUESTION: "How could pyOpenSci help you with your science, code, and software?"</h3>

{% include pyos-blockquote.html quote="[*I want pyOpenSci to*] clarify Python packaging. There are too many different mechanisms floating around..." author="" event="2021 SciPy BoF" class="highlight magenta" %}

</div>

<figure>
    <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/images/python-packaging/pyopensci-python-package-tools-word-cloud-2024.png"><img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/images/python-packaging/pyopensci-python-package-tools-word-cloud-2024.png" style="max-width:80%" alt="This is a giant word cloud with dozens of words. The biggest words are Build, Poetry, Conda, Setuptools, Sphinx, pip, Hatch, Mamba, Twine PyPI, venv, and GitHub Actions."></a>
    <figcaption>This word cloud represents around 100 responses to the question: What Python packaging tools do you most often use? It demonstrates both 1) how many tools there are to choose from and 2) how divided the ecosystem is in terms of which tools they are using. Yes, a few tools there aren't explicitly Python packaging tools. :) </figcaption>
</figure>

> There are some excellent, more advanced guides and tutorials available now, such as [PyPA's packaging tutorial](https://packaging.python.org/tutorials/) and the [scientific Python development guide](add link). However, our resources serve a different audience.

Author: ```suggestion
There are some excellent, more advanced guides and tutorials available now, such as [PyPA's packaging tutorial](https://packaging.python.org/tutorials/) and the [scientific Python development guide](https://learn.scientific-python.org/development/). However, our resources serve a different audience.
```

> There are some excellent, more advanced guides and tutorials available now, such as [PyPA's packaging tutorial](https://packaging.python.org/tutorials/) and the [scientific Python development guide](add link). However, our resources serve a different audience.

Author: yup. you got it! i missed that one!

[Check out the GitHub pull requests for packaging guide pages](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/python-package-guide/pulls?q=is%3Apr+sort%3Acomments-desc+is%3Aclosed) if you're curious about the feedback and discussions that we had when writing the packaging guide. Notice the number of comments on the most popular PRs. The sheer volume of comments on some of the early PRs associated with packaging build tools speaks to the various issues, complexity, and decisions we needed to make.

## **Building Python packaging consensus and developing the pyOpenSci Python packaging guide**

The success of our Python packaging guide is due to extensive community input.

> We directed Python Packaging Guide contributors towards the objective of simplifying Python packaging for beginners. Focusing on a specific audience allowed contributors to make decisions about the content in the Guidebook more easily. It also ensured that the outcome text is easy to understand for beginners and for scientists who prefer to avoid delving into packaging nuances. In each review, we made sure to include a diverse group of reviewers, including:

Author: ok that one I can add to grammarly to catch.

The pyOpenSci packaging guide provides an overview of the Python packaging ecosystem to support users who want to understand the packaging landscape. These users may want to decide on their own which tools best serve their needs. The guide also defines core packaging terms that can make the ecosystem seem more complex than it is, such as:

* [build backend](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/package-structure-code/python-package-build-tools.html#build-back-ends)
* [build frontend](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/package-structure-code/python-package-build-tools.html#python-package-build-front-ends)
* [wheel](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/package-structure-code/python-package-distribution-files-sdist-wheel.html#wheel-whl-files)
* [sDist](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/package-structure-code/python-package-distribution-files-sdist-wheel.html#source-distribution-sdist)

Our  Python Packaging Guide aims to translate the technical jargon that gets in the way of new users having a successful packaging experience. Over time, we
hope that this will make packaging less confusing and more accessible to more people.

<figure>

>  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/images/python-packaging/"><img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/images/python-packaging/publish-python-package-pypi-conda.png" alt="Diagram that has the pyOpenSci logo in the upper left-hand corner with the pyOS flower. The diagram has four steps for making a package - create package structure, add code, add metadata to pyproject.toml, and finally, pip install package. The four steps are within arrows that point to two building shapes representing the PyPI and conda-forge warehouses. Below each of those steps, represented as storage houses, the code instructions for installing using a package from that warehouse is written out. "></a>

Author: Do you mean add the code in the image to the alt tag rather than the actual steps to install?

Our guide is becoming a global resource!

You may be wondering where all of these new contributors are
coming from. We get many new active contributors when we lead events at core meetings.

I'll talk about that next.

## pyOpenSci at PyCon and SciPy 2024 -- sprints, talks and new contributors

We've held sprints at SciPy and PyCon US in the past two years.
We had significantly more engagement at SciPy and PyCon in 2024 compared to 2023. What is most impressive is many of our sprint participants have continued to contribute to pyOpenSci after our in-person sprint events.

While pyOpenSci operates mainly as an online community, I find there is no better way to build a core community than by holding in-person events at large meetings. While we get plenty of expert Pythonistas at our sprints, our sprint events are always beginner-friendly. Many first-time contributors help pyOpenSci with various open issues on our help-wanted GitHub project board while submitting their first pull requests and issues to GitHub.

> Beginner-friendly sprints represent a true win-win for both contributors and pyOpenSci.Contributors learn new skills, and pyOpenSci gets help with the vital work that they are doing.

Author: I love that. I changed it to "we". That language aligns more with our values.

had collaborated with [other partner communities, such as Astropy](https://www.pyopensci.org/software-peer-review/partners/astropy.html).

Here is my SciPy video if you want to check it out now. :)

{% include video id="uCLlshkTBM0" provider="youtube" %}

## pyOpenSci's software peer review program is growing, too

Funding has propelled pyOpenSci's peer review process forward. While pyOpenSci has run peer review since 2019, funding allowed us to document, formalize, and make the peer review program more sustainable and scalable. The [peer review guide](https://www.pyopensci.org/software-peer-review/) was one of the first things I worked on in the Fall of 2022. The goal of this guide was to
define each role in the software peer review process
define policies around our review package scope, how we review, how we determine what is in scope, and more

> The guide also documents our [community partnership program](https://www.pyopensci.org/partners.html), that pyOpenSci in 2024 through our collaboration with Astropy.

Author: ```suggestion
The guide also documents our [community partnership program](https://www.pyopensci.org/partners.html), which we launched in 2024 through our collaboration with [Astropy](https://www.pyopensci.org/software-peer-review/partners/astropy.html).
```

</figcaption>
</figure>

<!-- TODO: rename  repo to "guide" (rename it to be metrics and then link to it) -->

You can see more of our [peer review metrics on the myst markdown metrics dashboard here](https://www.pyopensci.org/peer-review-metrics/pyopensci-peer-review-stats)
{: .button }

### Is pyOpenSci's peer review program diverse?

Diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA) are core to everything that pyOpenSci does. But how do we know that we are aligning with that core value?

Data can help us here, too. Here are a few insights from 93 people who have participated in our peer review program survey over the past two years. Our peer review participants represent a healthy mix of students, industry professionals, and academics.

Almost half of the participants identify as having some computer science application in their work; 80% self-identify as scientists (as mentioned above).

> About 50% of our peer review team self-identifies as white. The other help are from a mix of different backgrounds and ethnicities—about 60% of our audience self-identify as male.

Author: oh that is definitely a typo. I am not sure where help came from here. the list i have is rather long. 

good catch. I will revisit that sentence locally and rewrite it.

> ####  Open Source metrics

Author: I'm torn on this. I'll do a quick query in Slack. The Microsoft style guide adds a dash. I followed that guide. But for no good reason other than it's microsoft.

To ensure that pyOpenSci is sustainable, we’re rolling out paid online training events. Paid events are a revenue model used by other nonprofits in our ecosystem:

NumFocus runs PyData and SciPy meetings
The Python Software Foundation runs PyCon as a significant fundraising event.
These paid events will support the low-cost training, event scholarships, free online tutorials, and resources we will continue to create and publish online.

## What's next for pyOpenSci - The Road Ahead
Our next training event is the inaugural pyOpenSci Fall Festival - a week-long event that teaches skills needed to:

* Write cleaner, more modular code,
* Package and share code,
* Publish and cite code,
* Create reproducible reports that connect code, data, and outputs into a dynamically produced interactive publication

We also will develop collaborative GitHub lessons following the BSSw fellowship I received this year.

## Get involved with pyOpenSci

> Congratulations on reading my longest post ever. I hope you are as excited as I am about pyOpenSci's future.

Author: oh intersting
<img width="1235" alt="Screenshot 2024-08-29 at 4 34 54 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/82213842-c01d-473e-830c-e3a39bc19580">
<img width="1246" alt="Screenshot 2024-08-29 at 4 34 42 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6897d25f-741a-405b-b283-dc827e5be7f1">
. i didn't look at the words, i just looked at the read time for the posts. Jekyll suggests this one is over 20 minutes (and I cut a lot from it to get it to 20).

If you'd like to get involved with pyOpenSci, check out our [volunteer page](/volunteer.html).

You can also:

* Keep an eye on our [events page](/events.html) for upcoming training events.

Follow us on social platforms:

 [<i class="fa-brands fa-discourse"></i> Discourse](https://pyopensci.discourse.group/) ** [<i class="fa-brands fa-mastodon"></i> Mastodon](https://fosstodon.org/@pyopensci)
** [<i class="fa-solid fa-cloud"></i> Bluesky](https://bsky.app/profile/pyopensci.bsky.social)
** [<i class="fa-brands fa-linkedin"></i> LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pyopensci)
** [<i class="fa-brands fa-github"></i> GitHub](https://github.com/pyOpenSci)

If you are on LinkedIn, you should subscribe to our newsletter too.

<div class = "notice" markdown="1">
## About Me

> My name is Leah, and I'm the executive director and founder of pyOpenSci. I have over 20 years of experience in both academic and nonprofit spaces and have dedicated my career to helping scientists overcome the challenges of open science. I've built and led two successful data science programs:

Author: ```suggestion
My name is Leah, and I'm the Executive Director and Founder of pyOpenSci. I have over 20 years of experience in both academic and nonprofit spaces and have dedicated my career to helping scientists overcome the challenges of open science. I've built and led two successful data science programs:
```
